At Eden Project is the world's largest indoor rainforest.
a plant has built up energy for many, many years,
and is about to finish it, over 48 nasty hours.
This is a carcass flower and it smells of death.
It's like a dead rat, mixed with rotten fish.
Some people describe it as a garbage container that has not been emptied for two or three weeks.
It smells of decay.
These plants use flies and beetles in the same way as other plants use bees: pollination.
The smell of death: it is very attractive to flies and beetles
looking for a place to lay eggs.
These bloom only when they have built enough energy,
And it can take anywhere between 7 and 10 years.
Titanium arum blooms only for 48 hours.
On the first night, it can only receive pollen.
The second night, it releases pollen. It cannot pollinate itself.
Over time, evolution will move species towards strategies
with the greatest chance of success.
And immediately the cadaver flower's strategy does not seem to be particularly good:
only 48 hours after the year's wait.
I mean, of course, it would be a better idea to reproduce as often as possible.
And there are many plants that do, which everyone with pollen allergy knows.
But there is another possible strategy:
build energy for many, many years,
and burn it all over a couple of nights
to send out a mating call so large that it can smell miles away.
It uses heat to make the smell go further afield.
These plants are thermogenic. They generate their own heat.
And they reach up to body temperature.
It is capable of sending scents over the crowns of the rain forest,
where it can catch a breeze.
And insects can therefore smell the blossom, over 3,000 meters away.
It is the same temperature as a dying animal,
and the smell is like rotten meat. And - if you try to come here -
this is the color we normally see in the butcher.
It's the color of meat.
So in many ways, it lures flies and beetles,
to believe they have found a carcass.
Which leaves us with the issue of smell.
So, I came a few hours late,
it is obviously over the worst, but ...
... Yes. Yeah okay. It is bad! It is...
Many thanks to the Eden Project for inviting me.
They have a YouTube channel you can check out,
and they are open year round in Cornwall, in south-west England.